# **INPUT INFO: TE Type statistics**

_This README contains information about the required input files for running a trial of the Snakefile Option 5_

## Testing 
For running a test to see if Option5 works in your computing environment you should first perform a test run for Snakefile Option4. It will provide all of the necessary files for testing option 5. See instructions for more detils.
* You will need the following files in the `{workflow.basedir}/output/cleaned_csvs/{seq_name}` directories, where workflow.basedir corresponds to your specific working directory. They should have been generated by a test of Option4.
1. araThaTEST_Garlic.csv
2. araThaTEST_EDTA.csv
3. araThaTEST_EG.csv
4. araThaTEST_RM2.csv
5. sacCerTEST_Garlic.csv
6. sacCerTEST_EDTA.csv
7. sacCerTEST_EG.csv
8. sacCerTEST_RM2.csv
* Test input files for Option 5 can be downloaded [here](https://doi.org/10.7924/r4m61sj94)

## Running from scratch
For running Option5 from scratch, you will need
1. Garlic, or other reference, CSV file(s) formatted with expected 8 columns with filenames that follow the nomenclature {seq_name}_{ref_extension}.csv.
3. Output cleaned CSV files with the nomenclature {seq_name}_{prog}.csv unloaded into the `{workflow.basedir}/output/cleaned_csvs` directory from your pipelines of choice. Default pipelines from running Snakefile_Option4 are
  * EDTA
  * EarlGrey
  * RepeatModeler2
> Note: you can add as many pipeline CSVs as you would like, so long as they follow the naming convention above and adhere to the expected 8-column CSV format. See instructions for more details.
3. Finally, you will need to edit the config_option5.yaml file to reflect to the correct reference file extension that matches your data, the target TE types, and the column you wish to filter on (default is column 5 which holds the element class). See instructions for more details.
> Note: Take note of the classes in column V5 after running Snakefile Option 4. Ensure that the nomenclature matches across all CSV files you want to compare.
> * An easy way to see what classes you are dealing with is to run `cut -f 5 -d , {seq_name}_{prog}.csv | sort --uniq` in bash on a CSV file formatted using one of the gff_to_csv.R scripts. These scripts may need adapted to handle differently organized output GFFs in Snakefile Option4, if you are to run a pipeline that is not EDTA, EarlGrey, or RepeatModeler2.
> 
> To avoid errors, you may need to clean up the TE classes so that the options match across all files.
